Price

"idea of not building"

Snowdon Aviary (1965) - "first walk-through aviary", "second largest aviary in the world", "first permanent tension structure in the UK",

"Price designed around the philosophy that buildings should serve the needs of those that use them and be either transformed or demolished when they no longer matched their purpose."

      
'Price said he wanted to get away from building “more monuments to a medieval sense of learning”. His Potteries Thinkbelt was to have been based on the region’s network of disused railways with carriages used as classrooms with fold-out workspaces and inflatable lecture theatres.'

"focusing on time-based urban interventions and flexible or adaptable projects that invited the user’s participation. His implicit criticism of contemporary notions of architecture earned Price heroic status among fellow architects such as "

"On the one hand, Fun Palace was inspired by the egalitarian philosophy of eighteenth century English pleasure grounds, such as Vauxhall and Ranelagh, with their sprawling spaces for strolling, amusement, and gossip. On the other hand, Price’s unrealised project was up-to-the-minute, interpreting current Cybernetic theories, avant-garde theatrical principles, cutting edge technology, and a free-spirited, Monty Pythonesque sense of fun. The ultimate goal was a building capable of change in response to the wishes of users."

""If you look at the Fun Palace, he anticipated the whole idea of the internet, the idea of participation, of feedback loops, it's all there and it was basically his idea," said Obrist, who is widely regarded as one of the most influential figures in the art world."




====

Looking at Cedric Price, Archigram.

Influenced by Sant'elia, 


infrastructure, technology


Sponge Building

Walking City?

"proposed building massive mobile robotic structures, with their own intelligence, that could freely roam the world, moving to wherever their resources or manufacturing abilities were needed. Various walking cities could interconnect with each other to form larger 'walking metropolises' when needed, and then disperse when their concentrated power was no longer necessary. Individual buildings or structures could also be mobile, moving wherever their owner wanted or needs dictated."

Plug-In City



Kunsthaus Graz

ARUP / Pluggable skyscraper

Pompidou

OMA

BiG / Bjarke
