Final Paper

Unite different characters into a general story about a sustainable modern architecture



Towards a Theory of Sustainable Architecture / Ecological Design

What is Ecological Design? What is sustainable architecture? There is a general sense that sustainability is an add-on to our current lifestyle - solar panels added to roofs, recycling added to trash collection. 

However, this is not really ecological design. Our present way of living is deeply out of touch with a "correct" way of living with the world. Inspired by monumental technological, 


This paper was inspired by Thomas Leeser's insistence that sustainability was not in fact an element of architecture - that it was simply a technological appendage that provided moral justification.

If this is all that sustainable architecture means, then perhaps the idea of sustainable architecture has not been plumbed deeply enough.

What then does sustainable architecture mean? To some people sustainable architecture means solar panels and compost bins - simple fixes that make our current buildings "greener" and thus more ethically acceptable. To others, it means smaller (tiny) houses, or dense urban living or bike transit - restructuring of our living situations to fix things. To others, it means overthrow of the current capitalist paradigm - a situation that is inextricably linked to our destructive use of the environment. To others it is about non-building - about adaptive reuse or changing perceptions so that the environmental damage that is implicit in building can be avoided.

To examine the idea of sustainability in modern architecture we will separate the vision and examine the historial roots of its many pieces.







Adolf Loos / Ornament is Crime.




Bruno Taut


Bruno Taut prefigured the sustainable utopia with his Alpine Architecture and other glass-inspired visions of utopia.

Ecological vision.

What else?



Buckminster Fuller

Buckminster Fuller is at his core an architect of sustainability. In some ways, sustainability is an extremely seductive philosophy because it has a strong moral direction - even stronger than the modernist movement, sustainability recognizes an urgent societal need - 

- world view of humanity
- idea of architecture as the crafting of the world
- solar energy
- world GDP, etc.

- energy and material efficiency

"War is obselete" / Universal utopia



Net zero housing

passive house


Cedric Price / Non Plan / Fun Palace / Potteries Thinkbelt
Yona Friedman?
Superstudio 

