A Worldwide, 100 year long Crystal Chain: Bruno Taut, Bucky Fuller, Cedric Price (+ Adolf Loos)

"We are gods and might as well get good at it." - Stewart Brand, Whole Earth Catalog.

It's not really possible to write a true history of any period. Writing history is about reducing an endlessly complex, chaotic system into something that is comprehensible, digestible. It is a reduction of a messy reality into a didactic story, a story that the author wants to tell. Asked to write a history of the last hundred years of architecture (or really, a bit more than the last hundred years) - there are many questions that have to be answered - where to start, who to include and exclude, what is important and what isn't. What is the story that we want to tell. Ultimately, history is written for the present and the future. The purpose is to frame a set of events in a certain way, to create a narrative that will be useful for our present and future conditions.

This class in particular is founded on the idea of history as an operational device - we should use history as a way to examine ourselves, to inform our own architectural practice. For practicing architects, history cannot exist in isolation, as its own object, but must be marshalled for its use in our own designs. Just as we explore architectural precedents (physical history) to develop our own designs, we pick and choose the pieces of history that are useful to us, and are free to disregard the rest until the time comes that they will serve their purpose. 

Of course, this approach is vulnerable to critique. Colin Rowe assailed the modernists for their cynical use of theory and history to justify the forms that they wanted to make. Ultimately, the dream of modernism failed - revolutionary architecture did not produce revolutionary social systems - and we were left with a big mess to clean up and make sense of. Of course we still struggle with this problem today. At the same time, modern architecture also produced a beautiful and powerful set of forms and building, which could not have been produced without the aggressively confident theories that supported their creation. And Colin Rowe makes peace with this problem - while the theory that supported modernism fell apart, the forms remain valuable, fascinating, beautiful - and we can make up new reasons for their existence if we so choose.

This class addressed architectural history from a perspective close to the much-discredited "Great Man theory" of history - that history is the story of great men, "heroes", whose actions largely determine the path along which humanity advances. Presentations were assigned around powerful figures - architects or groups of architects who had a powerful impact on the profession. Occasionally, we dealt with an architect who was disregarded in his own time - the Van Goghs of architecture, such as Frederick Kiesler, newly rediscovered by the parametricists - but even these men (and they were almost all men) will be great for some amount of time.

Other elements - political or social or economic factors, even the large class of "mediocre" architects whose names are not worth mentioning - occasionally formed a backdrop, but we viewed history through the lens of these important people who - this being architectural school - we all dream we will join one day in the pantheon. Of course, probably none of us will, but we will address that fact after we graduate, not in the school where we are all trained to become great designers.

Although this model is problematic - and what isn't problematic in architecture, anyway - I will do what I can to follow a few strains and learn from the great men who I presented about. I will attempt to describe their individual, highly idiosyncratic life stories as a unified thesis about the progression of architecture from the end of the 19th century to the beginning of the 21st. Although the idea of this becoming a real story of architecture is inherently broken, we all know that architecture is a field where good lies are more valuable than awkward truths. So let us spin some good stories about what the future of architecture means for the past, and vice versa.

====

I will be telling the story of four men - Adolf Loos, Bruno Taut, Bucky Fuller, Cedric Price - and maybe a few other characters will make appearances.

Adolf Loos was born in Brno, Austria-Hungary, in 1870, and died in Vienna, Austria in 1933. Bruno Taut was born Bruno Taut was born in Konigsberg, Germany 9 years after Unification in 1880, and died in Istanbul, Turkey in 1938, having fled Nazi Germany because he was a radical Jew who certainly would have been murdered. Bucky Fuller was born to an aristocratic family in Milton, MA in 1895, and died in Los Angeles, CA in 1983. Cedric Price was born in Stone, Staffordshire in 1934, and died in London in 2003. 



In choosing my presentations for this semester, I have been drawn to radical architects - architects who for various reasons stand outside of the traditional architectural narrative. Of course, any important architect in some ways

In this paper, I will attempt to apply these lessons of these men to three subjects of particular interest to me - technology, nature, and architectural practice itself.





Adolf Loos + [Whover I want] Patrik Schumacher?



#### Practice

As an average student about to graduate from a middle-of-the-road M. Arch program, I have bene particularly concerned about the realities of practice. Unlike students at the GSD or GSAPP, I have not imagined that I will explode in some triumphal trajectory when I graduate from school. It seems far more likely that I will be an architectural serf, working long hours at a large corporation drawing bathroom details, or something like that. Having spent many hours over the last year pondering this possibility, I have come to the conclusion that the system of architectural practice is in some ways broken. 

Architecture has strangely isolated itself from many of the rewards of the field. Perhaps because of its attachment to historical models of practice based in the Beaux Arts, and the general conception of the architect as artist first, everything else second, architecture has defined itself as the production of drawings or representation of buildings. 

Buckminster Fuller offers a truly amazing and inspirational example of architectural practice. Although, like much of his liberal, patrician New England family Fuller matriculated to Harvard, he never graduated, twice being kicked out for [various infractions.] After kicking about various careers for several years, Fuller was in the throes of a depression, considering suicide, when he received a vision from, as he would refer to it, Universe - "[quote tk]. "

From this point on, Fuller committed himself "to work always and only for all of humanity" [Design Ecologies, 51] - although he would rely on (and run through) the money of his wife, various friends, etc., he became in essence a freelance inventor, proposing and developing schemes for different  universal products that would solve large-scale world problems. Is this kind of approach possible today? 

[Of course, one might also ask the question of whether Fuller was an architect at all. Fuller never formally studied architecture - indeed, Fuller never graduated from college at all - and his work was a synthesis of architecture, engineering, invention, and whimsy. ]

If anything, it is now far easier to be self-employed. The entire United States economy seems to be in the process of shifting from a system of large-scale corporations, pensions, etc. to one where each individual is his own product - marketing himself and taking what jobs appear. This kind of employment can take many forms - ultimately, Fuller was employed by various universities (speaking fees?)...

[If Bruno Taut was an architect whose life was embedded in his time, Fuller was the opposite - an autonomous architect whose works seem to stand as separate and outside of his era, essentially an architect of the future.]

Bruno Taut offers a somewhat frightening counterexample to Fuller - although an immensely talented architect, his career was heavily determined by the economic-historical aspects of his time - almost an inevitability considering that his mature practice happened to occur in Germany approximately between World War I and World War II. 

"Much of Taut's literary work in German remains untranslated into English."

Taut's first major works appear shortly before the beginning of the first World War - a time of immense productivity and optimism, Taut believed that Glass Architecture had the potential to transform society. Although this conviction was not broken by the outbreak of World War I and the subsequent depression, it meant that there were not many architectural commissions available for the decade after his early major works. Taut turned inwards in response, leading the creation of the "Crystal Chain" correspondence group - a kind of secret society dedicated to dreaming big ideas in private. [The Crystal Chain corresponds to the internet.] As the Weimar Republic emerged from the depression, they initiated a great public building campaign. Most of Taut's built work emerges from this period - large-scale, well-built, still-revered public housing projects such as the Horsehoe[...] and Uncle Tom's[...] 

The final phase of Taut's career was dictated by the rise of the Nazi party in Germany. Taut, a Jew, recognized the danger of the political climate, and left the country, first for the USSR and, finding no work there, moving on to Japan and later Turkey. In Japan, Taut made major contributions to the Western understanding of Japanese architecture, describing the Katsura Imperial Villa...

Adolf Loos provides another instructive example of how to practice architecture. Built a myth for himself by heading to America. Wrote as a critic before emerging as an architect in his own right. Worked as an interior designer before becoming an established, government-sponsored architect. 

The first, is that his essay "Ornament and Crime" has remained new and relevant to this very day, despite the fact that Loos predates modernism by quite a bit. The essay has such power that it is known and read by every architecture student at some point; it is seen as perhaps a precursor, or a starting point, for one of the main ideas of modernism - that decoration is sinful, or at least that decoration has no place for the modern architect.